Therapeutic Innovation & Regulatory Science (2024) 58:845–854
https://doi.org/10.1007/s43441-024-00639-0

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Simultaneous Global Drug Development and Multiregional Clinical
Trials (MRCT): 5 Years After Implementation of ICH E17 Guidelines
Rominder Singh1

· William Wang2 · Aloka Chakravarty3 · Jun Wang4 · Yoshiaki Uyama5

Received: 23 October 2023 / Accepted: 1 March 2024 / Published online: 12 May 2024
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to The Drug Information Association, Inc 2024

Abstract
The ICH E17 guidelines (2014–2017) on Multiregional Clinical Trials (MRCT) was a joint effort by the regulators and
industry to facilitate simultaneous global drug development and registration through taking a strategic approach for clinical
trials. In other words, the objective was to reduce the time it takes to bringing medications to patients around the world
through minimizing unnecessary duplication of local or regional studies, which may add the regulatory burden to cost and
time of bringing new therapies to patients. Under the auspices of ICH, training materials were created and provided to
various stakeholders. Despite the successful promotion of the benefits of ICH E17 MRCT guidelines across the different
regions, the uptake of some concepts (e.g., pooling strategy) in the ICH E17 guidelines has been slow. This paper describes
various factors which could affect the conduct of MRCT at a global level, including ambiguity in definition of “region” (in
MRCT), new regulatory requirements to enroll a diverse patient population, the use of decentralized clinical trials, use of
data sources other than randomized clinical trials (e.g., use of Real Word Data), and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
on the conduct of MRCT.
Keywords Multiregional clinical trials · MRCT​· Drug development · ICH E17

Introduction
History of ICH E17 Guidelines

Aloka Chakravarty—This work was performed as the Senior
Statistical Advisor, Office of the Commissioner, US Food and Drug
Administration.
* Rominder Singh
drugdevpro@gmail.com
1

Pfizer Research and Development, 10555 Science Center Dr,
San Diego, CA 92121, USA

2

Merck & Co., Inc, 126 East Lincoln Ave, Rahway, NJ 07065,
USA

3

Pfizer Chief Medical Affairs Office, 66 Hudson Boulevard,
New York, NY 10001, USA

4

Center of Drug Evaluation, National Medical Products
Administration, Zone 2, No. 22 Guangde Street, Economic
and Technological Development Zone, Beijing, China

5

Regulatory Science Center, Pharmaceuticals and Medical
Devices Agency, Shin‑Kasumigaseki Building, 3‑3‑2,
Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda‑ku, Tokyo 100‑0013, Japan

The International Council for Harmonization (ICH) is a
global organization that brings together regulatory authorities and pharmaceutical industry experts from around the
world to develop guidelines on the quality, safety, and efficacy of pharmaceuticals. One of the recent guidelines developed by the ICH is the E17 guideline, which focuses on the
general principles for planning and design of multi-regional
clinical trials (MRCTs) in drug development.
The development of the ICH E17 guideline began in 2014
with the formation of an expert working group consisting
of regulatory authorities and industry experts from across
the world. The working group was tasked with developing guidelines to harmonize the planning and design of
MRCTs simultaneously across multiple regions. After several years of discussions and revisions, the draft guideline
was endorsed by the ICH assembly in June 2016 followed
by the public consultation in each region. The guideline
was revised based on feedback received from stakeholders,
and the final version was published in November 2017 [1].

13

Vol.:(0123456789)

846

The guideline aims to ensure that MRCTs are designed and
conducted in a manner that produces reliable and interpretable results while minimizing the burden on study subjects
and investigators. Subsequently, the ICH sponsored the E17
Implementation Working Group to develop training material
and provide the training to various stakeholders including
the regulators, academia, and the industry [2].
The ICH E17 guideline, expanding on the ICH E5
[3], covers several key topics, including the rationale for
conducting a MRCT, the selection of regions and populations
for inclusion, the use of bridging studies, and the handling
of data from different regions. It is recommended that the
ICH E17 should be used together with other ICH guidelines,
including E5, E6, E8, E9, E10 and E18 guidelines [2]. By
providing clear and comprehensive guidance on the planning
and design of MRCTs, the guidelines make sure that clinical
trial data is reliable and interpretable, ultimately benefiting
patients and public health.

Status of Implementation of ICH E17
Guidelines in each Region
A literature search on PubMed for the term ‘MRCT’
or multiregional clinical trials show that the number of
references peaked around 2020–2021. The US Food and
Drug Administration adopted the guidance in July 2018.
The European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries
and Associations (EFPIA) found in its survey of seven
multinational companies that there was significant difference
in uptake and application of ICH E17 guideline [4]. A similar
survey by the Japanese Pharmaceutical Manufacturing
Association (JPMA) found that the respondents had
questions about the application of the MRCT guidelines [5].
In both the EU and Japan surveys, lack of clarity on defining
the sample size and “pooling strategies” was identified as
one of the major reasons on lack of understanding of the
guidelines.
A publication of an online survey of representatives
from industry, academic centers and clinical research
organizations in Korea [6] evaluated the ICH E17 guideline
for clarity, applicability to Korea, the impact to local
environment and the adoption time. The acceptability and
appropriateness of the guidelines varied across various
groups of respondents. The results suggest adoption period
was approximately 1–2 years.
In Japan [7], dose-selection, consistency between the
overall- and Japanese-populations and good clinical practice
compliance were well considered in MRCTs. However, the
use of relevant guidelines for disease and primary end point
definitions, standardization of efficacy/safety information,
sample size allocation as well as training/validation on
subject selection and primary end point, were addressed

13

Therapeutic Innovation & Regulatory Science (2024) 58:845–854

less adequately and may need to be considered when
planning future MRCTs. Recent studies also suggest further
collaboration opportunity in Asia in conducting MRCTs [8]
and a potential delay in drug approvals in Japan resulting
from less participations of Japan in MRCTs [9].
These findings suggest that there may be a need to
improve awareness and adherence to the ICH E17 guideline at a global level to ensure that MRCTs are conducted
efficiently and with high-quality data that can be used for
drug approval across multiple regions. As depicted in Fig. 1
from the ICH E17 guidelines, design and conduct MRCTs
will allow for near simultaneous registration of drugs across
multiple regions [2].

Possible Reasons Behind Slow Uptake of ICH
E17 Guidelines
Over the last decade, particularly since the outbreak
of COVID-19 pandemic, traditional drug development
paradigm is changing. Historically, drug development
applied the sequential Ph1-2-3 drug development paradigm.
This traditional approach is changing due to several
factors that have emerged over the past few years. This is
particularly true for diseases with significant unmet medical
needs, such as rare diseases, life-threatening conditions,
or areas where existing therapies are inadequate or nonexistent. These factors have led to a shift in the way new
drugs are discovered, developed, and approved. The ICH
E17 guidelines as written may not take into account changes
in the drug development paradigm which are discussed
below.

Increased Focus on Personalized Medicine
The growing understanding of the human genome and
the molecular basis of diseases has paved the way for
personalized medicine. This approach aims to develop
targeted therapies based on a patient’s unique genetic
makeup, which may render the traditional one-size-fits-all
approach obsolete.

Expedited Regulatory Pathways
Expedited regulatory pathways including the US FDA’s fast
track, breakthrough therapy, priority review designations,
and accelerated approvals [10], EU’s PRIME designation
[11] or PMDA’s priority review and Sakigake designation
and conditional approvals [12] are mechanisms provided by
regulatory agencies to facilitate and expedite development
and review of new drugs that are intended to address an
unmet medical need. These pathways aim to ensure that
therapies for serious conditions are approved and available

847

Therapeutic Innovation & Regulatory Science (2024) 58:845–854

Figure 1  Conduct of MRCTs could lead to near simultaneous regulatory submissions (adapted from the ICH E17 guideline [1]).

to patients as soon as possible. To take advantage of these
expedited pathways, the sponsors tend to conduct local or
regional studies rather than conducting MRCTs as these
mechanisms allow for faster regulatory approval based on
Phase 1 or Phase 2 data, which can be especially critical
for patients with limited or no treatment options which are
not generally amenable to MRCT as described in the E17
guideline.

Focus on Patient‑centricity
There is a growing emphasis to involve patients in the
drug development process, from early-stage research to
post-approval studies. This shift towards patient-centricity
ensures that new therapies are developed based on patients’
needs and preferences. While the use of patient reported
outcomes (PROs) in MRCTs can provide valuable insights
into the effectiveness and impact of treatments from the
patient’s perspective, there are several challenges associated
with their use such as cultural and linguistic differences
which can lead to challenges in evaluating results of PRO
measures and assuring the reliability and validity of the
data. Translation of PRO measures needs to be culturally
appropriate, not just linguistically correct. Depending on the
setting and the patient population, different methods of data
collection (e.g., paper, electronic, interview) may be utilized.

The collection methods may have implications for data
quality, sensitivity and specificity of PRO measurements.
Finally, ensuring the same PRO measures are analyzed
and interpreted in the same way across diverse regions
and populations can be challenging, making it difficult to
interpret the MRCT data generated from PROs. Although
there is no specific mention of PROs in the current ICH E17
guidelines which is an evolving area in conduct of clinical
trials, the E17 did discuss the use of endpoints that may
have differences in understanding when used in different
cultural settings.

Change in Definition of a “Region” and “Pooled
Region”
In the context of MRCTs [2], “Region” is typically defined
based on a combination of factors such as:
Geography
This is the most obvious factor and refers to the physical
location of the countries involved. For instance, the region
might be “East Asian countries” or “Sub-Saharan African
countries.”

13

848

Regulatory Environment
Countries with similar regulatory environments or the same
regulatory bodies (like the European Union) may be grouped
together as a region.
Pooled Region
These areas are typically pooled together based on
certain shared characteristics, such as ethnic, genetic,
environmental, or socio-economic factors, disease
prevalence, or health system similarities. Thus, data from
various geographies can be pooled based on the common
factors or to provide a more comprehensive understanding
of the drug’s efficacy and safety across diverse populations.
The definition of a region is important because it
determines the population that is represented in the clinical
trial. It also has implications for the extrapolation of the
results of the trial and their acceptance by regulatory
authorities in different parts of the world. By pooling data
from different regions, researchers can assess the consistency
of a drug’s effects and identify any potential differences in
responses among various populations including a pooled
region. It’s a crucial part of designing and implementing
an MRCT. The concept of a “pooled region” was described
in the ICH E17 guideline is particularly relevant when
analyzing data from MRCTs, as these trials are conducted
across multiple regions with different ethnicities, cultures,
and healthcare systems. However, when pooling regions,
it is crucial to ensure that the grouping is justified and
scientifically sound. Insufficient information and data
about impact of ethnic factors to drug responses would
make application of pooled concept more difficult. Factors
such as the similarity of the patient populations, healthcare
practices, standard of care, and regulatory requirements
should be considered when deciding which regions to pool.
More accumulation of data on ethnic factors through conduct
of MRCTs and other related research would be useful for
better interpretation of data from MRCTs [1, 2].
It is important to note, as highlighted in the previous
section, various survey results have suggested that there
is lack of understanding, and application, of the “pooled
region”.

Diversity in Clinical Trials
When the ICH E17 guideline was being drafted, the
concept of “diversity in clinical trials” was not specifically
highlighted or emphasized [13]. It was expected that
when designing a MRCT protocol for global drug
development diverse patient populations in clinical
trials ensure that the study findings are applicable to
people of different ages, races, ethnicities, genders, and

13

Therapeutic Innovation & Regulatory Science (2024) 58:845–854

socioeconomic backgrounds in all regions. This helps
to identify any potential differences in drug response
among different groups and ensure that new treatments
are safe and effective for the intended population. It was
also emphasized that understanding genetic and biological
differences would allow to study different populations that
may have varying genetic backgrounds and biological
factors that influence drug response, metabolism, and
safety. Including diverse participants in clinical trials
allows researchers to better understand these factors and
optimize drug dosing, efficacy, and safety for various
populations.
In theory, MRCT could be conducted in one “region” if
that region has similar influential factors that representative
of the multiple regional population. In that ideal situation,
the data can be used for registration in another region.
This strategy was tested unsuccessfully, when the US
Food and Drug Administration rejected the registration
of an anticancer immunotherapy drug that was primarily
developed in another single country [14]. The FDA opined
that the sponsor needed to provide clinical data that is
applicable to the U.S. population. This rejection by the US
FDA has cited the principles of E17 as the agency and its
outside advisers were critical for not enrolling a diverse
enough population for the results to be applicable to U.S.
patients. It should be noted, the ICH E17 guidance also
recommend including various populations from different
regions for examining similarities and differences of ethnic
factors on drug response from an early phase of clinical
trials. The FDA decision highlights the need for diversity
in clinical trials and could deter drugmakers from relying
on clinical tests exclusively performed in one country for
a global registration.

Evolution of Decentralized Clinical Trials
The use of decentralized clinical trials (DCTs), also known
as virtual or remote clinical trials, have become popular
over the last few years especially during the COVID
pandemic [15, 16]. Here the clinical trial relies on digital
technology and innovative methods to collect data from
study participants without requiring them to visit a central
trial site or clinic. This approach aims to increase the
accessibility, efficiency, and convenience of clinical trials
for both participants and researchers. As part of remote the
monitoring participants can be monitored remotely using
digital devices, such as smartphones, wearable sensors, and
telemedicine platforms. Telemedicine consultations and
home-based interventions are also allowed.
While DCTs offer numerous benefits, they also come
with potential challenges that differ across the regions,
such as data privacy and security concerns, technology

849

Therapeutic Innovation & Regulatory Science (2024) 58:845–854

access disparities, and ensuring data quality and regulatory
compliance. Despite these challenges, the adoption of
DCTs is expected to increase as technology continues to
advance and the need for more efficient and patient-centric
clinical research grows. Moreover, not all regions and
regulators allow for conduct of decentralized clinical trials
thus creating lesser opportunities for global participating
using DCT. Many of these topics related to DCT were not
considered when the ICH E17 guidelines were drafted.

Increase Use of Real‑World Evidence/Data (RWE/
RWD)
Real-world evidence (RWE) is derived from real-world data
(RWD), such as electronic health records, claims databases,
patient registries, and other sources outside of controlled
clinical trials. RWE has the potential to inform healthcare
decision-making and complement evidence from traditional
clinical trials [17, 18], although there are both advantages
and disadvantages associated with RWE.
However, the ICH E17 guideline did not explicitly
consider the use of RWD and RWE. For example, although
data sources may vary significantly across different regions,
with variations in data collection methods, data quality, and
access to proprietary databases. Understanding and adhering
to the specific regulations in each region can be challenging,
as there may be differences in data privacy and security
laws, consent requirements, and data sharing agreements.
Differences in treatment guidelines, access to healthcare
services, and healthcare infrastructure may introduce
bias and confounding factors in the analysis of RWD.
Understanding and accounting for these regional variations
is critical for accurate interpretation of the findings. Finally,
extrapolation of RWD/RWE across different populations and
regions can be challenging.

Limitations of ICH E5 Guidelines
ICH E5 guideline Titled: Ethnic Factors in the Acceptability
of Foreign Clinical Data, published in 1998 provides
recommendations on how to evaluate the potential impact
of ethnic factors on the safety and efficacy of drugs [3].
The ICH E5 guideline focuses on the extrapolation of
foreign clinical data to a new region, but it may not be fully
applicable in situations where a drug is being developed
simultaneously in multiple regions or in global clinical
trials. The ICH E5 guidelines are about 3 decades old, and
since then, our understanding of the role of ethnic factors
in drug response has evolved significantly. For example,
the guideline may not fully capture the current state of
knowledge in pharmacogenomics and related fields. Also,
there appears to be more focus on genetics and intrinsic

factors which are easily identifiable while the extrinsic
factors are more difficult to study and are generally
overlooked.
The definition of the region, denoted by the ‘R’ in MRCT,
has also evolved under the E17 guidelines. Multiregional
clinical trials involve conducting clinical studies in different
geographic regions simultaneously. The definition of the
region has expanded beyond geographical boundaries to
include factors such as regulatory and ethnic considerations.
The E17 guidelines provide guidance on how to interpret
and apply the concept of region in the design and conduct
of multiregional clinical trials, considering these broader
implications.
Relating to the discussion about region, the question
always remained, who is Asian? Asia is a diverse continent
spanning 30% of the world’s landmass and over 60%
of the world’s population. Thus, geographic location,
race, and ethnicity by themselves are poor surrogates to
determine meaningful clinical effect. A single ethnic label
of “Asian” may not represent the broad diversity between
collections of people in Asia. Thus, the “Asian” phenotype
underestimates the genetic diversity of Asia yet potentially
overstates its impact on variability in drug disposition and
pharmacodynamics [19].

Not All Sponsors are Created Equal
Historically the drug development and clinical trials was
“vertically integrated” whereby the sponsor, generally a
multinational pharmaceutical company, would have end to
end drug development in-house—starting with preclinical to
post-marketing. The ICH E17 guidelines encourage to “start
with end in mind” approach of designing Phase 1 studies to
identify various confounding factors that would guide the
subsequent phases including the pivotal studies. However,
over the last two decades the drug development paradigm has
changed from integrated R&D (whereby the sponsor would
conduct the research leading to development) to “S&D”—
Search and Develop. It is well recognized that acquisitions
have played a significant role in drug development and
marketing in recent decades. Pharmaceutical companies
often acquire start-up or smaller biotech companies to
gain access to promising drug candidates to enhance their
own product portfolios. Since the smaller biotechnology
companies often rely on being acquired as their exit strategy
they are focus on speed with studies within same country or
region rather the MRCT. This resulted in smaller companies
designing Phase 1 and 2 studies with the intention of being
acquired and not considering the end-to-end development
approach advocated in the ICH E17 guidelines. In many
cases, a small company will develop a drug to a certain
stage, and then a larger company will acquire the small
company and will conduct the later-stage trials and bring

13

850

the drug to the market. Hence these acquired assets do not
have the necessary MRCT data from various regions around
the world to design meaningful pivotal MRCT studies and
continue the strategy of local/regional development and
registration.
Recent report from US Congressional Budget Office in
2021 show that small drug companies (those with annual
revenues of less than $500 million) now account for more
than 70% of the nearly 3,000 drugs in phase III clinical trials
[20]. While no data are available to identify if these are
being conducted using MRCT, if speed to market is the aim,
then it is likely these studies are being conducted locally or
regionally. These small drug companies are also responsible
for a growing share of drugs already on the market. Since
2009, about one-third of the new drugs approved by the
US Food and Drug Administration have been developed by
pharmaceutical firms with annual revenues of less than $100
million [21]. Many of these companies have been acquired
by larger companies. Large drug companies (those with
annual revenues of $1 billion or more) still account for more
than half of new drugs approved since 2009 and an even
greater share of revenues, but they have only initiated about
20% of drugs currently in phase 3 clinical trials [22]. These
larger companies have the means and expertise to conduct
MRCTs, Data are lacking on how many of these large
companies do conduct MRCT studies as a rule while the
start-up or smaller companies do not have the resources or
expertise to conduct MRCT studies with global registration
strategy in mind.

Not all Products Require MRCT​
Oncology, neurology, and infectious diseases have all had a
rising share of new launches in the past five years with 197
of the 330 launches (60%). Precision medicine increasingly
dominates in oncology where targeted therapies account for
almost all of research, and over 40% of the pipeline is for
rare cancers with nextgeneration biotherapeutics [23]. Thus,
not all drug development may require multiregional clinical
trials. For example, cell and gene therapies are generally not
amenable to MRCT rather are more suitable for small multicenter or even as part of cancer network such as NCCN
(National Comprehensive Cancer Network). Previous studies
have shown that usually large outcome studies for CV or
diabetes have effectively utilized the end-to-end MRCT [24].

13

Therapeutic Innovation & Regulatory Science (2024) 58:845–854

Recommendations on How to Improve
the Uptake of ICH E17 Guidelines
E17 Pooling Strategy and Its Application
One of the key concepts introduced in the ICH E17 is
the pre-specified pooling strategy (see Principle #4 in the
ICH E17 [1]). This Principle aims to provide flexibility in
sample size allocation to regions, facilitate the assessment of
consistency in treatment effects across regions, and support
regulatory decision-making. The pooling strategy should be
based on established knowledge about key intrinsic/extrinsic
factor and effect modifiers (i.e., those intrinsic/extrinsic
factors that impact the treatment effects). The identification
of these factors should be collected and examined early in
the drug development program, and further be reflected in
the study design at late stage (ICH E17 Training Module
2) [2].
Based on these systematic approaches of collecting,
examination, to reflection on intrinsic/extrinsic factors,
study subjects who have similar factors shall be defined
prospectively in late phase trials, either as pooled region
(e.g., pooling patients from East Asia Countries with similar
confounding factors) or pooled subpopulation (e.g., pooling
patients with particular polymorphism). The consistency
evaluation should be structured and can take a layered
approach that examine treatment effects at country level,
region level, subpopulation level and global level. To enable
the holistic evaluation, the sample size allocation can focus
on the pooled region and/or pooled subpopulation, balanced
with the considerations of country level regulatory need [25]
(Also, refer to ICH E17 training modules 4 to 6 [2]).
It should be specially noted that early phase studies, such
PK/PD studies or epidemiology studies, can provide valuable
information to define the pooling regions/subpopulations.
The 2014 guideline “Basic principles for conducting
phase 1 trials in the Japanese population on prior to global
clinical trials” in Japan has given specific consideration for
conducting early phase trials in the region [26]. The NMPA
Center for Drug Evaluation (CDE) is developing related
guidelines, including considerations for conducting early
phase trials in China prior to confirmatory MRCT. The
strategies for conducting a phase I trial in China should be
comprehensively evaluated during the clinical development
plan. This guideline can facilitate guiding the related work
and promote China to participate in global development as
soon as possible [25]. A future ICH E17 Q&A document
may be useful to provide a harmonized guidelines on the
connection between early and late phase trials for MRCT
design and interpretation of the current guidelines.

851

Therapeutic Innovation & Regulatory Science (2024) 58:845–854

Apply Lessons from the Pandemic on Conduct
of MRCT and ICH E17 Guidelines
The vaccines developed during the pandemic applied many
of the principles outlined in the ICH E17 guidelines and
there are many lessons learned from the use of MRCTs which
should be made business as usual [27]. For example, the
pandemic underscored the need for greater harmonization
of regulatory requirements across countries. Differences in
regulatory requirements did not slow down the initiation
and progression of MRCTs. The pandemic also accelerated
the adoption of remote monitoring and other digital health
technologies in MRCTs. These technologies can enhance
the efficiency of MRCTs even post-pandemic. The changing
conditions of a pandemic require flexibility in trial design.
Adaptive trial designs, which allow modifications to the
trial after it begins (based on interim results), have proved
to be particularly beneficial. As the pandemic evolved,
participation in MRCTs provided the flexibility to pivot
resources and focus to regions where the pandemic’s impact
was greater. Frequent communication with the regulators
as recommended in the E17 guidelines provided guidance
to sponsors on how to manage clinical trials during the
pandemic, addressing issues such as protocol deviations,
remote monitoring, and patient safety. Despite the need for
speed the regulators ensured that the study findings were
applicable to populations of different ages, races, ethnicities,
genders, and socioeconomic backgrounds for drug approval.
This helped to identify any potential differences in drug
response among different groups and reduce disparities in
healthcare access and outcomes.
While not discussed in the ICH E17 guideline,
the pandemic provided examples of Emergency Use
Authorization (EUA) for the use of medical products that
have not undergone the usual rigorous testing and approval
process. Likewise, there were Conditional Approval
where a medicinal product received conditional approval
based on less complete clinical data and iterative phases
of data gathering than normally required if the drug fills
an unmet medical need for a serious condition and had
positive impact on public health. All these pathways
accelerated the drug development and approval process
which can be weaved in the future design and conduct of
MRCT. However, as noted earlier, the ICH E17 guidelines
were written whereby intrinsic and extrinsic data would
be generated in earlier phases of the clinical development
to help with design of pivotal studies. Due to urgency and
speed of drug development during the pandemic, many of
the intrinsic and extrinsic factors were not collected in early
phase of development During the pandemic the sponsors
and the regulators were not necessarily thinking “how do
I apply ICH E17 guidelines” rather their focus to how to
simultaneously develop vaccines and life-saving therapies

around the world. The focus was on speed, quality, and
consistency-all the factors advocated in the ICH E17
guidelines.

Adaptive Clinical Trial Design and Its Application
to MRCTs
Adaptive clinical trial design has become increasingly
popular to increase productivity of drug development. This
is further fueled by the urgency brought by the pandemic.
New ICH guidelines (ICH E20) are being developed
on the design, conduct, analysis, and interpretation of
adaptive clinical trials. Even though ICH E17 did not
specifically discuss this topic, more and more MRCTs
are using adaptive design, especially group sequential
design for global simultaneous drug/vaccine development
and registration. A few additional points may need to be
considered: (1) Aligning with the ICH E17 principles, the
interim analyses that have the potential to stop the trial
early for multi-regional filings may need to examine the
regional consistency as part of the key supportive analyses;
(2) the data monitoring committee (DMC) may need to
have representations, not only from different functional
expertise (e.g., clinical, statistics), but also from key regions;
(3) In case the trial results are considered insufficient (e.g.,
limited sample size/exposure or total amount of statistical
information such as event counts) for some regions, and
if the MRCT has a regional extension, the proper firewall
should be in place to maintain the trial integrity.

Focus on Social Determinants of Health for Extrinsic
Factors
Historically there has been too much focus on ICH E5
guidelines with the regulators and sponsors about impacts
of ethnic factors, especially intrinsic factors such as genetics
since the genetic-factors are often more quantifiable and
easier to study than many non-genetic factors. However,
as our understanding of drug response continues to evolve,
the field is increasingly recognizing the importance of
considering a broad range of Social Determinants of Health
[28], not just genetic ones, to truly optimize drug therapy for
different populations. Drug development is a multifactorial
complex process and the ICH E5 guidelines should be
taken into context of new definition of ‘region’ in MRCT
as defined in the E17 guidelines that encourage pooling of
data across regions especially focusing on the determinants
of health.

13

852

Increase Focus on Patient Reported Outcomes
Patient Reported Outcomes (PROs) offer insights into
how a treatment is experienced by patients across various
regions, providing valuable data on the effect of cultural,
geographical, or socioeconomic factors on patients’
perceptions of their health and treatment. PRO measures
would need to be standardized across multiple regions
to provide consistent data, even though the trials are
conducted in diverse geographic and cultural settings and
would provide holistic understanding of treatment impact.
Finally, the PROs can help regulatory authorities make more
informed decisions about the approval and labeling of drugs
and treatments [29–31]. This data would provide a more
complete picture of the benefits and risks of a treatment
from the patients’ perspective. This would require consistent
data collection across multiple regions, each with its unique
language. The translation and cultural adaptation of PRO
measures need to be done carefully to maintain their validity.
It is also critical to ensure that data privacy regulations are
adhered to when collecting and processing PRO data from
different regions. There is no mention of this in the current
ICH E17 guidelines but can be considered in design of the
MRCTs.

Pivot Towards Digital
The pivot towards digital technologies has been a
significant development of MRCTs, particularly during the
pandemic. As travel and face-to-face contact were heavily
restricted due to safety concerns, digital technologies
proved invaluable in facilitating continued clinical
research. This has manifested itself in enhanced remote
monitoring and data collection using electronic informed
consent (eIC) to reduce the need for physical paperwork
and in-person meetings. There was increase in telemedicine
through virtual visits with trial participants, assessing
their condition, providing advice, and even delivering
some forms of treatment remotely. If telemedicine is to
become a part of MRCTs, new methodology would need to
be created to ensure the data quality with stricter QA/QC
checks. Many MRCTs are moving towards a decentralized
model, where many aspects of the trial, such as patient
recruitment, data collection, and even some aspects of
treatment, are conducted remotely using digital tools.
There is increased use of artificial intelligence (AI) and
machine learning (ML) technologies for data analysis,
pattern recognition, and predictive modeling, making
it possible to quickly analyze the vast amounts of data
generated by MRCTs and gain insights more quickly.
Finally, the cloud-based data storage and sharing digital
storage solutions will make it easier to store and share the
large volumes of data generated by MRCTs, improving

13

Therapeutic Innovation & Regulatory Science (2024) 58:845–854

collaboration, and enabling more rapid analysis. While the
pivot towards digital technologies had many benefits, it
also brings new challenges. Issues such as data security,
privacy, and the digital divide (where some populations
may not have access to the required technology) need to
be carefully managed to ensure that MRCTs are conducted
ethically and effectively. Incorporating this in consistent
manner across the various regions would allow to
effectively incorporate digital methodologies into MRCT
design and conduct.

Update the ICH E17 Guidelines Through Q&A
One of the ways ICH maintains and improves upon its
existing guidelines is through a Questions & Answers
(Q&A) process. This process allows for clarification,
interpretation, and expansion of the guidance provided
in the guidelines based on questions or issues raised by
stakeholders. Historically the Q&A are developed five to
seven years after the original publication. With the Q&A
the ICH guidelines can remain current and relevant to be
interpreted and applied consistently across different regions.
It also would allow for a level of flexibility and adaptation
in response to emerging issues or advances in scientific
understanding.

Conclusion
It has been over 5 years since the ICH E17 guidelines on
MRCT were adopted and training material produced by
ICH. Much has changed on how drugs are developed and
registered, especially some novel approaches were adopted
during the pandemic which were not originally considered
when the ICH E17 guideline was developed. In response to
these changes, there are still topics that require clarification,
such as pooling strategies, local vs. regional data for
registration, and other operational challenges.
In addition, the pandemic has shown us that newer
approaches adopted by sponsors and regulators can be
used to perform clinical trials and approve medicines. This
has contributed to shorter registration timelines and more
streamline clinical studies. The question now remains can
we weave-in the principles of ICH E17 MRCT into the drug
development and registration approach for the next decade.
This may be a good time to start the ICH Q&A process to
provide more contemporary guidance.

853

Therapeutic Innovation & Regulatory Science (2024) 58:845–854

Author Contributions

All authors (except JW) were members of the expert working group
for ICH E17 guideline published in 2017. The views expressed in this
article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official
views of the Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency, National
Medical Products Administration or those of companies that employ
them.

10.

11.

Funding

No funding was received for this work.

12.

Declarations

13.

Conflict of interest

RS, WW, AC work for for-profit biopharmaceutical companies. The
work by AC was performed as the Senior Statistical Advisor, Office of
the Commissioner, US Food and Drug Administration. JW and YU are
regulators who work for their respective regulatory agencies.

14.

15.

16.

References
1. The International Council for Harmonisation of Technical
Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use. General principles for planning and design of multi-regional clinical trials E17
https://d​ ataba​ se.i​ ch.o​ rg/s​ ites/d​ efaul​ t/fi
​ les/E
​ 17EWG_S
​ tep4_2​ 017_​
1116pdf Date: Nov 16, 2017; Date accessed: April 28, 2023.
2. ICH (International Council for Harmonisation of Technical
Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use). 2017. ICH
E17 Training Module.
3. The International Council for Harmonisation of Technical
Requirements. for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use Ethnic factors in the acceptability of foreign clinical data E5 (R1). https://​
datab​ase.​ich.​org/​sites/​defau​lt/​files/​E5_​R1__​Guide​line.​pdf Date:
Feb 5, 1998; Date accessed: April 28, 2023.
4. European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations (EFPIA), implementation of the ICH E17 guideline on planning and design of multi-regional clinical trials in international
markets. 2021; https://w
​ ww.e​ fpia.e​ u/m
​ edia/6​ 36586/e​ fpia-i​ ch-e​ 17-​
advoc​acy-​toolk​it_​dec-​2021.​pdf.
5. Japan Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association (JPMA). Drug
Evaluation From Now On What’s the value of local data in the
global clinical data package? July 2022; https://​www.​jpma.​or.​jp/​
engli​sh/​repor​ts/​drug_​evalu​ation_​commi​ttee/​dsdut​h0000​0004zz-​
att/​DS_​202212_​e17.​pdf.
6. Sohn M, Song Y, Jeon AY, Oh JM, Kim I. Perspectives on adopting the Guideline for multi-regional clinical trials in Korea: a
multi-stakeholder survey. Korean J Clin Pharm. 2019;29:267–77.
7. Asano K, Aoi Y, Kamada S, Uyama Y, Tohkin M. Points to consider for implementation of the ICH E17 Guideline: learning from
past multiregional clinical trials in Japan. Clin Pharmacol Ther.
2021;109(6):1555–63. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​cpt.​2121. Epub
2020 Dec 16. PMID: 33245786; PMCID: PMC8246727.
8. Aoi Y, Kato Y, Asano K, Otsubo Y, Uyama Y. Characteristics of
Asian participation in multi-regional clinical trials reviewed for
drug approval in Japan: opportunities for collaboration between
South-East Asia, East Asia, and Japan. Ther Innov Reg Sci; 2023.
9. Noguchi A, Hanaoka H, Uyama Y. Potential future drug development lag in Japan based on an analysis of multiregional clinical

17.

18.
19.

20.
21.
22.

23.
24.
25.
26.

trials in the US, Europe, and East Asia. Ther Innov Reg Sci.
2022;56:523–9.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Expedited pathways: Fast
track, breakthrough therapy, priority review, accelerated approval.
Retrieved from https://​www.​fda.​gov/​patie​nts/​learn-​about-​drug-​
and-​d evice-​a ppro​vals/​fast-​t rack-​b reak​t hrou​g h-​t hera​py-​a ccel​
erated-​appro​val-​prior​ity-​review Date accessed: October 1, 2023.
European Medicines Agency. PRIME: Priority Medicines.
Retrieved from https://w
​ ww.e​ ma.e​ uropa.e​ u/e​ n/h​ uman-r​ egula​ tory/​
resea​rch-​devel​opment/​prime-​prior​ity-​medic​ines Date accessed:
October 1, 2023.
Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency. Further Advancement for Early Patient Access Retrieved from https://​www.​pmda.​
go.​jp/​files/​00023​5784.​pdf Date accessed: October 1, 2023.
Fashoyin-Aje L, Beaver JA, Pazdur. R promoting inclusion of
members of racial and ethnic minority groups in cancer drug
development. JAMA Oncol. 2021;7:1445–6.
Desai A, Smith CJ, West HJ. Navigating approval pathways
for immunotherapy in NSCLC: should criteria be revised?
Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2023;20:423–4. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​
s41571-​023-​00761-2.
Agarwal P, Sverdlov O, Menon A, Desai A, Smith CJ, West HJ.
Navigating approval pathways for immunotherapy in NSCLC:
should criteria be revised? Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2023;20:423–4.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41571-​023-​00761-2.
Bhatt A, Evans T. (2020). The promise and peril of decentralized
trials. Appl Clin Trials, 29(8). https://​www.​appli​edcli​nical​trial​
sonli​ne.​com/​view/​the-​promi​se-​and-​peril-​of-​decen​trali​zed-​trials.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2018). Use of Real-World
Evidence to Support Regulatory Decision-Making for Medical
Devices: Guidance for Industry and Food and Drug Administration Staff. Retrieved from https://​www.​fda.​gov/​regul​atory-​infor​
mation/​search-​fda-​guida​nce-​docum​ents/​use-​real-​world-​evide​nce-​
suppor​ t-r​ egula​ tory-d​ ecisi​ on-m
​ aking-m
​ edica​ l-d​ evice​ s Accessed on
October 1, 2023.
Purpura CA, Garry EM, Honig N, Case A, Rassen JA. The role of
real-world evidence in FDA-Approved New Drug and Biologics
license applications. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2022;111:135–44.
Singh R, Teo YY. Asian phenotype underestimates the genetic
diversity of Asia yet overstates its Impact on Variability in Drug
Disposition and Pharmacodynamics. Clin Pharmacol Ther.
2019;105(4):802–5. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​cpt.​1329.
US Congresional Budget Office. (2021), Research and Development in the Pharmaceutical Industry; April 2021, https://​www.​
cbo.​gov/​publi​cation/​57126.
Geilinger U, Leo C, January, HBM New Drug Approval Report
(HBM Partners., 2019), p. 16. https://t​ inyur​ l.c​ om/y​ yzze4​ 76, (PDF,
1.14 MB).
US Government Accountability Office, Drug Industry. Profits,
Research and Development Spending, and Merger and Acquisition deals, GAO-18-40 (November 2017), p. 16, www.​gao.​gov/​
produ​cts/​GAO-​18-​40./.
IQVIA Institute for Human Data Science. (2019), The Changing Landscape of Research and Development (April 2019), p. 15,
https://​tinyu​rl.​com/​1cm3g​2fs.
Salim Y, Wittes J. Interpreting Geographic variations in results of
randomized, controlled trials. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(23):2263–
71. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1056/​nejmr​a1510​065.
Li G, Binkowitz B, Wang W, Quan H, Chen J. Simultaneous
global New Drug Development Multi-regional clinical trials after
ICH E17. Chapman & Hall; 2021.
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, Basic Principles for Conducting Phase I Trials in the Japanese Population Prior to Global
Clinical Trials, Administrative Notice on October 27(Evaluation
and Licensing Division, Pharmaceutical and Food Safety Bureau).
2014. https://​www.​pmda.​go.​jp/​files/​00015​7777.​pdf.

13

854
27. Sharma SK, Kulkarni S, Aggarwal R. COVID-19 Vaccine
Development and Launch: a review. Front Public Health.
2021;9:617239. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fpubh.​2021.​617239.
28. Center for Disease Control. Social Determinants Health CDC.
2021. https://​www.​cdc.​gov/​socia​ldete​rmina​nts/​index.​htm.
29. FDA. Guidance for Industry: patient-reported outcome measures:
use in Medical Product Development to support labeling claims.
Silver Spring, MD: US Food and Drug Administration; 2009.
30. European Medicines Agency Committee for Medicinal Productsfor Human Use. Appendix 2 to the Guideline on the evaluation
of Anticancer Medicinal products in Man: the Use of patientreported outcome (PRO) measures in Oncology studies EMA/
CHMP/292464/2014. London, England: European Medicine
Agency; 2016.

13

Therapeutic Innovation & Regulatory Science (2024) 58:845–854
31. Chinese Technical. Guidelines for the Implementation of Patient
Centered Clinical Trials – DRAFT August 2022.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the
author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of
such publishing agreement and applicable law.

